St. Mark has always kind of served as the black hub for African-Americans, and we're built in a small, small church style, where you walk up into the church, where the choir aloft is behind the pastor here in the church, and so it's built in that style, but it's built from the hands of the people who founded this church. So some of the woodwork has been being done over the years, but a lot of elements in here are the elements that were around back in the early days of the church. And so you would see the church continue to grow after it was built in the central hillside neighborhood, which was really the only area you could live legally, because of racially restrictive covenants for a while. The first black family to own land in an old property, the canal park area, only got that land because they had white folks, friends of theirs, and allies, secure their lands, and then it could be sold to them in the first place, and then a wealthy couple comes in and be able to establish, you know, eventually be pushed and moved here to the central hillside neighborhood, and then that's where this becomes the local black community, and it was so concentrated, and that was really a big deal for St. Mark. It really helped St. Mark to establish itself until he gets to 1921 in the Diddle of Legends. We see a huge drop-off in membership, and people in this area because of the terror that happened in there. And St. Mark was one of the places that folks were treated to, and had great sight lines, and this is where folks gathered. This is where W.E.B. Du Bois spoke, after Noutle Ray Nancy, who was born in Duluth of Duluth fame, you know, came here, and she did a lot of main things. She has amazing stories in it of itself. But she convinced W.B. Du Bois to come up here and speak, and would lead to establishing the NAACP chapter up here, which I think right now is the largest NAACP chapter, definitely in the state, and possibly in a much larger region. And there has been a lot of interracial work that's been done in that regard, especially since the black population has never been above 3% in the history of Duluth. So it's been concentrated, and then it's concentrated culture, music, learning. People would come here to learn tutoring sessions throughout the years. Many different pastors have come and served here. I mean, this is a historic church with over 100 years of history, I think we're in 136 or 38 or so. And so we are, are definitely a jewel in the state of Minnesota. And the churches are congregational models. And for the longest time, it was the people who did the work to maintain the church, to raise money for the church, to raise money for the upkeep of the church. And we have a pretty strong structure in that regard. So by doing all those things here, the church community here was all hands on deck from when it folks had the money, they would put money into the coffers. If they had the skill set, the masonry, they would put those resources into the table. So this church was built by brick, by brick, by the community, the dome that you see above us that's painted here. It's actually newer in the construction of the church. And it helps to allow this to be in church. Because before we had amplified sound, this church needed to function just with acoustic sound and acoustic instruments. And it actually looks, it sounds like somebody's coming through a microphone. A group of local painters that are part of the painters union that were here to do some work with the hospitals or one of the other big projects, said, Hey, we wouldn't work on that. And their labor helped to paint and build and paint the dome and some of the other parts of the building. Our fellowship hall downstairs is a traditional old school church fellowship hall with, you know, metal pillars around. And it's not huge. But we've been able to serve hundreds of people through here and both use inside and outside space, spinning out into the lawn. But we also have ministries like our birth as Saint Mark's birth as giving garden, which is a partnership with local organizations in the church that just grow produce and food and teach how to grow it and have programs and ministry things in the church are in the in the garden. And then anybody who walks in the garden can take if they're hungry. They can take food like there's, you'll see the the rules of the garden and not our, you know, help keep this a sacred space and do your part, consume it where you can. And then if you're hungry, you eat. And that's and then we take and then the garden also takes that fresh produce and members of the church and local communities, deliver that fresh produce to folks who may not live close by the church, but still need that fresh produce. The AME church motto is to it's administered to the spiritual, social and physical needs of the community. And so we've always been a church that, you know, it's not just a place you come for worship, it's a place you come to serve meals, place you come to have education programs, learn music. Our music tradition goes back many, many years in the AME church. And so this building has been used for every single one of those things, it's been used for daycare at times, it's been used for classes, it's been used. And even now, it's used for community meetings, in fact, as we speak, there's a health fair going on downstairs. And so before community centers, where hubs that they are, the AME churches often serve as pseudo community centers. Until they, until community centers move into more of a neighborhood and community function, that in companion to the church, because of course, we're spiritual folks here. And so there's been strong partnerships that have also happened with the AME church around many of the leaders of, of this community have been members here, at St. Mark, AME church and at Calmery Baptist church, because we have served as a hub. Not, no, I'm saying a hub, not D hub, right? Our intention is not to be the only game in town. Our intention is to be a place that ensures that we have a nod to the history of African-Americans and their participation in making the world what it is. That's the vision that we're starting to see, really crystallize from community, especially a community that is transient in some many ways, people come and go a lot. And so, but if there's going to be a hub or a base for you to get your bearings, that's the kind of vision that folks in community are beginning to crystallize.
